# Endpoint Documentation
This documentation describes what each endpoint does, what data it accepts and returns, what status codes may be returned, what roles are allowed to access it, how the client should use it, what endpoints the client is expected to request afterward, and other various information that should be known about the endpoint. They are broken up into a few sections for readability: account access, email verification, basic information management, multi-factor authentication setup and management, and account state tracking. Note that all endpoints will return a 500 status code if an API error occurs, and will return a string error message if a 400/500 response.

# Account Access
These endpoints are concerned with account login, registration, and logout.

### Refresh login / login from refresh token
- **Route:** */api/users/login-refresh*
- **Method:** POST
- **Accepts:** A JWT refresh token previously generated by the API on successful login.
- **Returns:** A login response model with a custom login code describing the access level based on account state.
- **Status codes:** 200 on success, 400 for missing or malformed token in request, 401 for invalid or expired token, 403 for account currently locked, 404 for no account found matching username in token.
- **Authorization:** Does not require access token (anonymous access).

This endpoint accepts a refresh token generated previously by the API on successful login in order to allow clients to log in again without requiring them to submit credentials and an MFA code each time. It is also used during a login session to refresh the user's access token once it is nearing expiration or expired. The user must submit their locally-stored refresh token (which should be stored securely) to the API.

Note that the server only stores a single refresh token for a given account, meaning that if a second device logs into the same account, the previous login will be effectively invalidated. This means that an account can only be logged into by one device at any time. Fortunately, this system can be leveraged to notify a user that another device has recently logged into their account, which may help with account security. Normally, the endpoint will only ever return status code 401 if the server-side token has been replaced with a new refresh token (and thus the client application can display a message to the user notifying them that another device may have logged into their account).

### Login (normal login with credentials)
- **Route:** */api/users/login*
- **Method:** POST
- **Accepts:** A username/email and password.
- **Returns:** A login response model with a custom login code describing the access level based on account state.
- **Status codes:** 200 on success, 400 for missing or invalid input, 401 for any logical failure (does not display reason details for security reasons).
- **Authorization:** Does not require access token (anonymous access).

This endpoint accepts a username/email and password in order to perform a basic login operation. The user can submit either a username or email, both will behave the same. For security reasons, this endpoint does not return a detailed status code or message on failure, and is designed to take the same amount of time to complete the request regardless of failure reason (to help prevent timing attacks). If successful, the returned access token contains a role based on the current account state: email not yet confirmed (10), password requires reset for security reasons (20), MFA not yet enabled (30), or login successful but awaiting MFA code submission (1). Because MFA is enforced for all accounts, a valid login will never return a full-access token (code 0), and instead will always return code 1 to denote that the user must submit an MFA code with this 'awaiting MFA' access token. The user should submit this token to the 'submit-mfa-code' endpoint below.

### Submit MFA code for login
- **Route:** */api/users/submit-mfa-code*
- **Method:** POST
- **Accepts:** A 6-digit numeric MFA code from the user's authenticator app.
- **Returns:** A login response model with a full-access token, unless account state changes during MFA code submission process.
- **Status codes:** 200 on success, 400 for missing or wrong-length code, 401 for incorrect code, 403 for account currently locked, 404 for no account found matching username in token.
- **Authorization:** Requires access token with 'awaiting MFA' role, received from the login endpoint.

This endpoint exists purely to complete the login process for a user, and only allows access by access tokens with the 'awaiting MFA' role. After the user successfully submits the correct credentials for their account, they must open their authenticator app to get a time-based one-time-password (TOTP) from their current MFA configuration. They will submit that code to this endpoint, which will fully complete the login process and return a full-access token with login code 0. Note that this endpoint may potentially return a non-full-access login response model if the internal account state changes between the initial login time and this MFA code submission process.

### Register (create new account)
- **Route:** */api/users/register*
- **Method:** POST
- **Accepts:** A username, email address, and password for the new account.
- **Returns:** A login response model with an 'email not verified' token (login code 10).
- **Status codes:** 201 on success, 400 for missing or invalid input, 409 for unavailable username, 422 for disallowed username or password (failed profanity filter or does not meet minimum security standards).
- **Authorization:** Requires access token with 'awaiting MFA' role, received from the login endpoint.

This endpoint is used to register (create) a new account. The user must submit a username (3-16 characters that can only include letters, digits, underscores, and spaces), a valid email address, and a password (8-64 characters that can include any displayable character but must include at least one uppercase letter, lowercase letter, digit, and symbol); if any of these are invalid or missing, the API will return a 400 error with a descriptive error message. The endpoint will return a conflict error if the username is unavailable, but will *not* for email address availability for security reasons (otherwise a malicious actor could abuse this endpoint to determine which email addresses are in use). Upon success, a new account will be created and the API will automatically send a confirmation code to the email for the new account; the response will always include an 'email not verified' token and code 10. The user is expected to open their email and submit the short-term 8-character alphanumeric code to the 'verify account email' endpoint.

### Logout
- **Route:** */api/users/logout*
- **Method:** POST
- **Accepts:** Nothing.
- **Returns:** Nothing.
- **Status codes:** 200 on success, 401 for missing or invalid access token, 404 for no account found matching username in token.
- **Authorization:** Requires access token with any role.

This endpoint simply logs out the user, retrieving the account data (like username) directly from the token. Server-side, the account's stored refresh token is removed from the database, disallowing further access token refreshing or refresh login; the user must explicitly log in again in order to access their account. While this endpoint returns 200 or 404, the logout process will almost always be performed without the user awaiting a response from this endpoint.

# Email Verification
These endpoints are specifically for resending a confirmation code to the provided email for email verification, and actually verifying the email.

### Resend email verification code
- **Route:** */api/users/resend-email-verification-code*
- **Method:** POST
- **Accepts:** Nothing.
- **Returns:** Nothing.
- **Status codes:** 200 on success, 401 for invalid or missing access token, 403 for account currently locked or cannot resend within 60 seconds of previous send, 404 for no account found matching username in token.
- **Authorization:** Requires access token with 'email not verified' role (initial account setup) or 'full access' role (manual email change).

This endpoint is used specifically for resending a confirmation code to the user's email, particularly for the email verification process. Unlike the forgot password endpoint, this endpoint returns details regarding whether the resend was successful because it requires a valid access token from the user. This endpoint should only be used if the user explicitly requests a new code, perhaps after waiting too long and thus the original code has expired. The user should call the 'verify account email' using the sent code to verify their email.

### Verify account email (using confirmation code)
- **Route:** */api/users/verify-email*
- **Method:** POST
- **Accepts:** A short-duration 8-character alphanumeric confirmation code sent to the user's email address.
- **Returns:** A login response model with a custom login code describing the access level based on account state.
- **Status codes:** 200 on success, 400 for missing or wrong-length code in request, 401 for incorrect or expired code, 403 for account currently locked, 404 for no account found matching username in token.
- **Authorization:** Requires access token with 'email not verified' role (initial account setup) or 'email change' role (specific to email change token).

This endpoint is used to verify the email address for a given user's account. The user must submit their current access token along with the 8-character alphanumeric confirmation code that was sent to the email address associated with the account. If the code is valid, the API will set the 'is email verified' flag for the account in the database, then return a login response model noting that the account email is verified (will still require MFA setup for new account, otherwise should be full access for manual email change).







