This document contains information about the API including an overview, per-endpoint documentation, how these endpoints should be used, and other important considerations regarding how the API operates.

# Overview
This API is a secure account access and management system, designed for use alongside an in-development multiplayer RPG (video game) project. It supports account access with basic login credentials as well as persistent login access using refresh tokens. Users can fully create and manage an account using this service, which includes email verification, multi-factor authentication setup, and various tools to manage account username, email, password, and MFA configuration. By design, the API ensures that users only have access to API endpoints when they meet specific criteria, like their account having been fully setup and verified. More details on this below.

### Fundamental login and access system
The most fundamental part of this API is the login system, as it is ultimately an account login and management API. The user is expected to submit their credentials (username/email and password) to return a login response if credentials are valid, which includes data like the account username and email (for informational purposes), as well as critical access data like a refresh token (for persistent access without requiring credentials every time) and a short-duration access token (which is used by the API to control endpoint access). **Every successful login response, regardless of current account state, returns a login response model that matches this structure (see below for specific details).** Importantly, the access token system used by the API leverages Role claims embedded within the token to determine which endpoints the user is allowed to access. Both refresh and access tokens are encrypted according to industry standards server-side so that users cannot directly read data within them; the API parses the submitted token upon request, returning 401 Unauthorized if the token is invalid or otherwise executing API logic as expected. When an access token is nearing expiration, it is the client's responsibility to utilize the refresh token received on login to 'refresh' their login session, which returns a brand new refresh token (which enables persistent access) and a new access token with the same exact internal roles (this is simply a refresh process). Upon logout, the API invalidates the refresh token server-side to ensure that the client which previously stored the refresh token cannot refresh again without explicitly logging in.
- Additionally, the API enforces multi-factor authentication for every user account before the account is considered 'set up' and usable. The account registration process described in the next paragraph details how MFA is enforced upon account creation.

### Registration and initial account setup
Account registration is relatively straightforward. The user submits a username, email, and password to the API in attempt to register a new account and receives a login response model if successful. Note that this registration process will fail if the username is unavailable or violates a basic profanity filter, the email address is invalid, or the password is invalid or does not meet minimum security standards. If a registration failure is detected, the API will return a text response describing the reason for the failure with an associated HTTP error status code (400-500). If the registration is successful, the user must immediately verify their email address via a short-term one-time-code sent directly to the user's email address (importantly, the API does not display to the user whether the email address is available to prevent lookup attacks by malicious actors, meaning it will 'attempt' to send an email to the address regardless of whether it is valid). The user is expected to submit this confirmation code to the API as its next step, which will return another login response model with a new access token if successful. The next step for the new account is to set up multi-factor authentication. The user is expected to make a request to the 'MFA setup' endpoint, which will generate a unique time-based one-time-password setup URL and return it within the response. **It is the client's responsibility to display this TOTP URL in QR code format and then await user acknowledgement before moving onto the next step (the user needs time to set up the configuration).** Once the user has set up their MFA configuration, the client application must retrieve an MFA code from the user and submit it to the 'verify MFA setup' endpoint. If the code is valid, then the account is considered 'fully set up' and the API returns a login response model with **full access** permissions; it also returns a unique MFA recovery code that the user can submit to recover their MFA setup if they ever lose access to their authenticator app. **Again, it is the client application's responsibility to display this recovery code to the user and ensure they have time to securely store it.**
- Usernames must be 3-16 characters and can only include letters, digits, underscores, and spaces.
- Passwords must be 8-64 characters and can include any displayable character, but must include at least one lowercase letter, uppercase letter, digit, and special symbol.
- NOTE: Upon initial registration, it is the client application's responsibility to ensure that the user takes care when submitting their password; once a password is submitted, it cannot be retrieved. Best practice is to require the user to fill out *two* password fields: one for the new password, one for 'confirm password' which must match the new password field. This helps to mitigate the possibility of a user entering a typo in their new password.

### Basic account information management
An account that has been fully set up and is fully-logged-into by the user will have access to various endpoint methods which allow managing account information and settings. Basic account information management includes changing username, changing email and changing password.
1. Changing username is relatively straightforward. The user submits a desired new username to the API alongside the full access token, and the API returns whether the new username submission was successful. The API returns a new login response model with updated account information (specifically the new username). Because usernames are essentially just account identifiers and are not necessarily associated with any security features, they can be freely changed. **An account's username can only be changed at most once every 30 days.**
2. Changing email is particularly complex because the original email *and* the new email must be verified before the email change process is complete. The user must first submit a request to the API to 'request email change', which will send a confirmation code to the account's existing email. They must then submit this code to the 'initiate email change' endpoint, which will return a specific 'email change token' that the user must send to the API for the remainder of the email change process (the remainder of the process expects this email change token instead of the normal access token). Next, the user must submit their desired new email to the 'submit new email' endpoint, which will fail if the submitted username is invalid for any reason. If this request was successful, the API will automatically send a confirmation code to that submitted email (like during registration, it does not return information regarding whether the email is available for security reasons). Finally, the user must retrieve this confirmation code from their submitted new email to the 'verify new email' endpoint; if the submitted code is valid, the API replaces the current account email with the new email and *forcefully logs out the user for security reasons*. The client application is responsible for notifying the user of the logout upon success. **An account's email can only be changed at most once every 30 days.**
3. Changing password is more complex than username change but less than email change. This password change process follows the exact same process as the forgot password process (see below), initially requiring that the user submits their current username to the 'forgot password' endpoint which requests the API send a confirmation code to the account's email. The user is then expected to submit this code to the 'initiate password reset' endpoint, which returns a specific 'password reset token' that behaves similarly to the email change token. Likewise, the remainder of the password reset process requires this password reset token instead of the normal access token. The last step is for the user to submit their new desired password to the 'submit new password' endpoint, which will fail if the new password is the same as the old password *or* the new password does not meet minimum security standards. If valid password, the API replaces the existing account password with the newly-submitted password and *forcefully logs out the user for security reasons*. Again, like email change, the client application must notify the user of the logout. **An account's password can only be reset at most once every 24 hours.**

### MFA configuration management
d

### Forgot password and recover MFA setup
The API also supports account recovery when necessary. This takes the form of a 'forgot password' system, as well as an MFA recovery system in case the user loses access to their current MFA configuration.
1. The forgot password system is relatively straightforward. The user accesses the 'forgot password' endpoint, which is fully accessible to un-authorized users (a user who has forgotten their password obviously is not logged in). This endpoint accepts a username or email, returning a success response regardless of whether the account exists for security reasons (otherwise this system could be used by a malicious actor to determine whether an account exists). Internally, the API tries to find an account matching the username or email, and if so, sends a confirmation code to that email. Assuming that the user owns the email, the next step is for the user to submit that short-duration confirmation code to the 'initiate password reset' endpoint. If the code is valid, the user is given a 'password reset token' which is *only* usable for the next 'submit new password' endpoint (this token exists exclusively for the password reset process, and does not grant account access in any way). Finally, the user submits their desired new password to the 'submit new password' endpoint, which effectively consumes the password reset token and updates the account's password.
2. The MFA recovery code submission requires a bit more care because it is the last line of defense against a potential attack against a user account. In summary, the user may only submit their MFA recovery code if they have begun the login process with username/email and password, but still need to submit an MFA code to fully log in. While the user has this 'awaiting MFA' access token, they can access the 'recovery MFA' endpoint, which accepts the MFA recovery code that the user should have stored after configuring their MFA setup. If the code is valid, the API generates a brand new MFA URI and returns it to the client (the client is responsible for displaying the URI as a QR code), the rest of the process which will follow the typical MFA setup process from the client's perspective. Behind the scenes, the API stores this pending MFA setup in the database and awaits the user verifying the new setup. The client must configure this new MFA setup, the move onto the 'verify MFA setup' endpoint with their 'awaiting MFA' access token role, which indicates to the API that the user is trying to verify a pending MFA setup. If the code is valid, the API replaces the active MFA setup with the new (pending) setup, and returns a full-access login response model with a new MFA recovery code for the new setup. **Importantly, recovering MFA does not involve the user's email address at all. If both an account's password AND multi-factor authentication setup could be reset with just email access, it would be a significant security vulnerability because all it would take is a user's email address being compromised for a malicious actor to completely take control of their account.**
If the above recovery methods are inadequate for an account, then the account owner will need to contact some form of customer support. This will likely occur most commonly when a user loses access to their MFA configuration but also does not have access to their recovery code; in this instance, they must contact support. It will be the support system's responsibility to make a determination whether the person contacting is the legitimate owner of the account; if so, support will be empowered to reset the account back to its essentially 'brand new' state, un-verifying the existing email and removing the MFA setup entirely. This will require another email verification and a brand new MFA setup. *The tools for determining whether the person is the account owner have not yet been implemented.*
