# Summary

This project runs a login API backend which allows users to login, logout, and manage account state for an exploratory in-development RPG project. It is designed for use alongside the RPG_Launcher WPF desktop application. It securely handles user account access and management, database access, and account data retrieval for gameplay purposes (like retrieving in-game character data for a 'game start' screen). Currently, this API directly accesses a secure MongoDB instance; in the future, it will access the database using a dedicated database API.

---

# Technical Description

The login web API runs on ASP.NET Core targeting .NET 8. It is designed from the ground up using industry best practices for structure and security, like heavily leveraging Dependency Injection and carefully considering separation of responsibilities, as well as ensuring that account information like passwords are stored in salted and hashed form within the database according to current OWASP standards. This project is still under development and will be expanded with more features like admin access and other game-relevant functionality.

### API Controller(s) and endpoints

ASP.NET Core Web APIs are split into split into two primary areas of consideration: Controllers and Services. Services perform actual logical operations and are passed around the web application using Dependency Injection (DI), with this structure being heavily leveraged by ASP.NET by design. On the other hand, Controllers define and run API endpoints which directly process user requests and responses. In this API, most controller endpoints are concerned with account login and security operations like login, register, logout, verify email, submit confirmation code, reset password, and so on. Other endpoints include non-account-management operations like retrieving a list of RPG Character IDs owned by the account. The UserController depends on the UserService class for actual functionality.

### Services and Dependency Injection

Dependency Injection (DI) is heavily leveraged by ASP.NET Core web applications as is the industry standard for managing multiple services in a modular and maintainable way. DI allows clear decoupling of services from one another, helping prevent 'spaghetti code' by enabling separation of concerns. In this API, multiple services are used alongside one another to ensure that each service is only responsible for a specific category of tasks rather than creating a single monolithic service that does everything. The four main services are:
1. Database Service - This service is registered as a singleton and is the only part of the application that connects to and performs CRUD operations on the MongoDB database (see the Database Solution section below). This service securely connects to the database (with MongoDB user authentication) and then verifies that it is successfully connected by performing a basic query on the MongoDB Instance.
2. Token Service - This service is registered as a singleton and is tasked with performing all manual JWT token operations like token creation, parsing, and comparison. It retrives a secure JWT signing key on application initialization and uses it to build token validation parameters. While the ASP.NET Core validation middleware typically handles access token validation in the controller, various manual JWT token operations must be performed using this service.
3. Email Code Service - This service manages sending email confirmation codes to user emails for various security purposes, and is also responsible for validating submitted confirmation codes. It retains an in-memory Dictionary of email:codeData, with this code data containing the code, its expiration time, and other relevant data. Any time that short-duration (5 minute) email confirmation codes are needed, this service is used.
4. MFA Code Service - This service handles MFA setup and management operations, essentially just providing utility methods to the User Service. It does not handle asynchronous operations to actually execute actions, but instead handles tasks like comparing submitted MFA codes and recovery codes, as well as generating new QR code data (for new MFA setup) and MFA recovery codes.
5. User Service - This is the main service that the Controller uses for user-accessible endpoint operations. This service depends directly on the two aforementioned services to perform CRUD operations on the database and to handle manual JWT token operations when necessary. Both of these services are passed to this service via DI on application initialization, then finally this service is automatically passed to the Controller when the application is built.

### Database solution

Currently, MongoDB is the database solution used to store account data. This leverages the official .NET MongoDB Driver NuGet package, which offers a robust toolset for interacting with MongoDB instances/databases/collections. User account objects are defined as MongoDB BSON models and used by the DatabaseService class to perform CRUD operations on the database. The MongoDB driver handles all conversion to and from BSON/JSON, given that the correct model classes are implemented.

### Logging

ASP.NET Core implements a robust logging system by default, and this system is used throughout the API. At the moment, only console logging is being used (this can be extended to support third-party libraries in the future). The built-in ILogger<> interface is passed via DI into each service and controller, abstracting any lower-level logging behavior from API development entirely. Methods like LogInformation() and LogError() can be easily called using the ILogger<> object. The application's *appsettings.json* file allows configuring the minimum log level that will be actually written/printed. By default, Information is the minimum for generic logging, whereas Warning is the default for ASP.NET logging (?).

### Containerization with Docker (+ Compose)

The application utilizes Docker for containerization, which allows the application to be built and published for platform-agnostic use; it also enables easily injecting environment variables into the application without requiring the use of the User Secrets system (see the **environment variables with Docker** section below for details on this). Visual Studio was used to automatically generate and configure the basic Dockerfile and docker-compose.yml setup (*Add -> Container Compose Support*), though they were each modified to support the application's desired behavior. For instance, the HTTP (non-TLS) configuration was removed from both the Dockerfile and docker-compose.override.yml, disallowing access without TLS. Additionally, the docker-compose.override.yml file was updated to include various environment variables which are pulled from the .env file, which is expected to reside in the same directory as the compose.yml file (see below).

Building the application ultimately remains the same as it was before, but now expects the Docker image to be built and run using Docker Compose. This process is relatively simple: first build the solution like normal, then right click the **docker-compose** project in the solution and click the *Compose Up* option. This will run the 'docker compose up' command, creating the container from the previously-built image and running it. The running compose container should be interacted with via Docker Desktop, which allows viewing logs as well as starting and stopping the container as desired.
- IMPORTANT: The docker-compose project that was automatically generated by Visual Studio should *not* be used when running the container. Visual Studio executes the containers differently while in debug mode, and the container will effectively become inaccessible after debugging in Visual Studio ends, even if the container is still running. Executing *Compose Up* manually (described above) means the container runs separately from Visual Studio and can be stopped and started without issue.

After the container is running, the container can be viewed using Docker Desktop. The external:internal port that the application is running on is visible in the Containers overview, with external port being the port in which the application can be accessed using. For all practical purposes, the API is accessible in the same way as it would be if it were not containerized. A client's HttpClient can directly make API calls to the IP:PORT (ex. localhost:7127) without issue.

### Public access with Cloudflare Tunnel

The running application inside Docker Compose is publicly accessible using Cloudflare Tunnel, which routes incoming traffic through a custom domain managed by Cloudflare directly to the locally-running instance. The Docker Compose configuration includes a cloudflare daemon (cloudflared) tunnel image which runs alongside the API container within the same network, allowing direct communication between the tunnel and the API. Note that because this is direct communication within an isolated Docker Compose network, the API does not (and should not) need to run on HTTPS (see **secure communication over HTTPS** section below). This Docker Compose configuration allows the application to connect to *any* Cloudflare Tunnel as long as the unique token associated with the tunnel is provided to the container via an environment variable (CLOUDFLARE_TUNNEL_TOKEN in .env.example); a valid token allows the tunnel image to directly connect to the Cloudflare Tunnel.

Managing routing and domains is done outside the context of this application. A domain must be purchased somewhere (ex. namecheap), while the tunnel itself must be created and managed through the Cloudflare Dashboard. The tunnel must then be configured with routes that point to the running application in Docker Compose, with one tunnel per unique subdomain (ex. example.com or api.example.com).
* **IMPORTANT:** The locally-running server pointed to in the tunnel route cannot use 'localhost' when running in an isolated Docker Compose network; instead, the local address must use the API container definition name within the docker-compose.yml file. For instance, the definition name for the API is 'rpg-login-api' and runs on internal HTTP port 8080, meaning that the local server address string in the tunnel route must be 'http://rpg-login-api:8080'.

**Cloudflare configuration:**
* Domain authority w/DNS records (one-to-one tunnel:record)
* Tunnel + routing (one route per subdomain, ex. www.* or accounts.*)
* Automatic HTTPS/TLS (Flexible mode for non-TLS between Tunnel and API)
* DNSSEC (configured by Cloudflare and submitted to domain registrar)
* Universal rate limiting (entire domain)
* Bot management (Bot Fight Mode to prevent AI bots)

---

# Security

### HTTPS and Cloudflare security settings

~~The API is only accessible by clients via TLS-secured HTTPS communication. ASP.NET handles this configuration automatically, given that launchSettings.json is configured to remove the HTTP profile. Currently, a self-signed certificate is being used to facilitate TLS, though this will need to be a valid third-party CA signed certificate in the future.~~

* **CORRECTION:** Because the application is published using Cloudflare Tunnel using an internal Docker Compose network, the API now runs only on HTTP (non-TLS) locally. Cloudflare managing its own SSL/TLS certificates for the tunnel, automatically enforcing HTTPS for all public traffic which is routed through the Tunnel to the running network within Docker Compose. Communication between the tunnel and the API within the network is safe using HTTP because it is an internal isolated network that is inaccessible to anyone but the local machine. This also means local testing (via localhost) does not support HTTPS, but the API should never been manually exposed locally without Cloudflare Tunnel.

In addition to HTTPS-only communication through Cloudflare, the domain is configured to defend against bots, denial-of-service attacks, and spoofing/cache poisoning. Cloudflare includes a handful of robust built-in defense measures, as well as DNSSEC to prevent spoofing / cache poisoning specifically. The DNSSEC configuration is generated automatically by Cloudflare, but this generated data must be provided to the domain registrar (if not Cloudflare) to complete the 'cryptographic chain of trust'. 

### Rate limiting (Cloudflare and locally)

The domain managed by Cloudflare is configured with universal rate limiting on a per-IP basis, acting as a general first line of defense for brute-force or denial-of-service attacks. This rate limiter will block traffic on Cloudflare's end, preventing excess traffic from reaching the server at all. By default, this is configured for one-request-per-second (10 requests per 10 seconds, technically) for all endpoints on the domain.

The API also implements strict per-IP rate limiting to act as a second layer of defense against brute-force or denial-of-service attacks. This configuration allows 10 requests per minute per IP, using a sliding window approach with 3 segments per window (3 seems to be standard). The rate limiter disallows queueing if the limit is hit, meaning it is a hard-enforced rate limit that will indiscriminately prevent any request that exceeds the limit. This rate limiter will be applied to all controllers in the application.

* **IMPORTANT:** Cloudflare Tunnel routes all requests through a local connection IP loopback (127.0.0.1 or ::1), at least as far as the API can tell by default. This means that combined traffic might hit the rate limiter very easily, which will then erroneously lock out every single client for the sliding window duration. To solve this, Forwarded Headers must be configured to retrieve the actual request's IP address from the Cloudflare Tunnel proxies. This includes defining the types of forwarded headers to support (XForwardedFor and XForwardedProto), then removing all default network/proxies that are generated by default (Cloudflare Tunnel forwards requests locally without the need for these defaults). Forwarded headers are configured on application build within Program.cs.

### Generic API responses and timing for sensitive endpoints

API endpoints which are accessible to anonymous (unauthorized) users are designed to not reveal detailed information which could be abused by a malicious actor. For instance, the login, register, send confirmation code, and forgot password endpoints interact directly with user accounts and are accessible by unauthorized users (naturally). If these endpoints revealed sensitive information like whether an account exists for the submitted email, a malicious actor could use this information to generate a list of emails which are in use (this in turn could be a tool used to phish known emails). Instead, these endpoints *do not* reveal any sensitive info but rather return generic responses that cannot be used to scrape for existing accounts. Some endpoints may not even return whether success or failure (ex. 'send confirmation code to email', which is used for 'forgot password' functionality, always returns 200 OK to avoid revealing whether the account exists).

In addition to returning only generic responses, the login endpoint also helps prevent against timing attacks by performing the same set of operations (and thus taking roughly the same amount of time) for all requests regardless of whether the account exists or not. If the user tries to log into an account with a username or email that does not exist, the API will still perform the same password hash and comparison that it would for a valid, existing account. This ensures that the endpoint returns after roughly the same time regardless of whether the account exists, helping prevent against attacks where a malicious actor spams the login endpoint and compares time taken to produce a list of existing accounts.

### Authentication, authorization, and multi-factor authentication

As is standard for any secure API, user authentication and authorization is critical. At the heart of this system lies Json Web Tokens (JWTs), which are used for authenticating users on login and for verifying a user's authorization when trying to access API endpoints. User data used for authentication is stored in a secure MongoDB database collection (details in the Secure Account Storage section below). Authorization depends on JWT token Role claims embedded inside the tokens, and are determined based on account state and checked on a per-API-endpoint basis.

Additionally, the API enforces multi-factor authentication using authenticator app TOTPs (time-based one-time passwords). Before a user can access any endpoints which are not for login or initial account registration/setup, they must set up an MFA configuration for their account. This utilizes the current TOTP standard with a QR code to generate 6-digit one-time passwords with a 30 second timeframe per password. Upon user login, the API responds with a refresh token and access token (see below for token details) with an "awaiting MFA" role to denote that the user does *not* have access yet, but first must submit a valid MFA code (TOTP). Once the user submits a valid MFA code, the API responds with a refresh token and access token with a full access role. Enforcing multi-factor authentication for all accounts dramatically improves account security and is generally considered standard for modern account access & management services.

### JWT access tokens and refresh tokens

Two different token types are primarily used for user account access and API endpoint access:
- Refresh tokens are persistent, long-lived JWT tokens which are used by clients to log in without requiring the user to enter their credentials again. On successful login, the API returns a new refresh token (along with an access token) to the client and stores this token internally within the database document associated with the user account. The client should securely store this token in a cookie or some other secure storage (like Windows DPAPI for a WPF app), and pass it to the login-from-refresh-token API endpoint to re-login without requiring full credentials. The API will validate this token and compare it against the stored token in the database to ensure the identity of the user. This token will store basic information for the account like the account username, a token-specific GUID, and a Role claim which determines whether the token grants full access or not (a refresh token is returned to the user even if they are not fully logged in, like while awaiting MFA code submission). Upon successful refresh login, the old refresh token is replaced with a new token to improve security and ensure that the user's account access is persistent.
- Access tokens are short-lived JWT tokens which are used universally to manage API endpoint access. A valid access token is the only way in which clients verify that they are securely logged in. A new token is returned by the API on successful login, and importantly is *not* stored server-side at all (stateless). Clients must provide a valid access token to the server whenever trying to access any non-login endpoint, which the server will then validate using built-in ASP.NET Core validation middleware. Access tokens store a unique username, a per-token GUID, and a Role which determines which endpoints the token allows access to; these together with the secret JWT signing key allow the API to ensure the validity of the user providing the token. When an access token is close to expiration, it is the client's responsibility to renew their token by logging into the API again with their stored refresh token. Upon logout request, the API validates the passed-in access token then invalidates the user's refresh token in the database and blacklists the current access token until it expires.

### Secure user account storage in database

The MongoDB database used by the API carefully implements user roles to ensure that users (like this API) can only access the database(s) and collection(s) necessary to operate. The connection string that this API uses to connect to the database includes credentials for a database user which can only access the necessary database and collection, adhering to the Principle of Least Privilege. Naturally, this connection string is highly sensitive and is stored outside the project in a secure location (see section below).

Additionally, user data within the database follows industry standards to ensure the integrity of user accounts in case of a database breach. Most importantly, passwords are *never* stored in plaintext form, and are instead stored in salted and hashed form. The API handles generating salt and hash, and this process follows current OWASP standards to ensure proper security (currently uses PBKDF2 with 600000 iterations, as is the OWASP standard as of December 2025). This can and should be updated as OWASP standards change. Refresh tokens stored within the database are also hashed using a secure hashing algorithm (SHA256), but are not salted.

### Environment variables with Docker

Sensitive data like JWT token signing key and MongoDB instance connection string must never be hard-coded or stored anywhere that it is at risk of being compromised. The API utilizes the industry-standard .env file to store user secrets, which is explicitly excluded in the .gitignore to ensure it cannot be accidentally staged with changes to the repository. During production, this .env file may be replaced with external secret/environment variable management services like **Azure Key Vault**, but the current system is valid and secure for both testing and production.

Docker compose manages injecting values stored in the .env file into the application configuration. Within the docker-compose.override.yml file, the rpg-login-api service populates the 'environment:' section with various settings with directly correlate with the Settings classes within the project's Configuration directory. By convention, the namespace and the variable name are separated by a double underscore (__) instead of a colon (:), which results in the *DatabaseSettings.ConnectionString* class field looking like *DatabaseSettings__ConnectionString* within the compose.yml file. These compose fields directly access the fields within the .env file, using the $\{variable_name} syntax to automatically pull values from the .env file and insert them into the compose.yml file. **The .env.example file shows the expected structure of the environment file, which the user should mimic to set their own environment variables. The user simply needs to create their own .env file in the same directory as the .env.example file and follow the exact structure in the example.**

### Other account security considerations

To help improve account security, a handful of account-relevant security features are implemented server-side. These include things like access token blacklisting, account locking after multiple consecutive failed login attempts, especially short-term access tokens for important account tasks, and so on.

- One security feature is account locking after multiple consecutive failed login attempts. When a given account retrieves a significant number (ex. 3+) failed login attempts within a short period of time, the user account is locked temporarily using a sliding window approach. In the future, this may be updated to implement an exponential backoff (where the temporary lock time doubles each time it is flagged), but for now it uses a fixed duration.
- Password reset logic requires submitting a short-duration (5 minute) one-time confirmation code that is sent to the user account's associated email. This confirmation is required for any password change, whether user-initiated (ex. via forgot password) or API-initiated (ex. account lock on too many failed login attempts). After submitting this confirmation code, the user is given a 5-minute one-time-use *password reset token*, which is just an access token with a specific password reset Role. This token must be submitted to the associated 'change password' API endpoint alongside the user's new password.
